# Assembly-Quick-Reference-Cards

## Why?

If you look around online, you can find Quick Reference Cards for assembly language programming for certain microcontrollers.  ARM has published a few of these for some of its instruction sets (but not for specific CPUs, which often use only parts of one or more instruction set), and I've found them to be very useful.  I also have a printed copy of one for the MSP430, which was quite handy as well.  Unfortunately, documents like these are not common, and you'll end up spending hours in a 20 to 50 page datasheet section that not only describes what the instructions are and how to use them but also what their machine language encodings are.  While this is great for those writing the programs that assemble the assembly language into machine code, they are terrible for those who merely want to _write_ assembly code.  This probably includes those who write compilers for higher level languages, but it _definitely_ includes those who want to learn to program in assembly, which can be a very useful skill when working with microcontrollers.

So, I recently bought a couple of dev boards from Adafruit, the QT Py CH552 (the CH552 microcontroller is an Intel 8051 derivative), and the QT Py SAMD21 (an ARM Cortex-M0+ microcontroller dev board).  I was unable to find Quick Reference Cards for either of these, and ARM doesn't even have a Cortex-M0+ card but expects the user to know exactly which instructions from the Thumb and Thumb-2 ISAs the architecture supports and just use those cards.  It turns out there's a fairly strong need for architecture specific Quick Reference Cards, rather than just ISA specific ones, since ARM likes to mix and match for their architectures.

## What?

As a result of the above, I made some Quick Reference Cards of my own.  One is for the Intel 8051, and the other is for Cortex-M0+ architecture (which is also what the RP2040 uses).  I can't guarantee I'll have time to make more, but I _do_ have a Ti Tiva C, which uses a Cortex-M4 chip.  So maybe I'll eventually have a reason to make one for that architecture.  I can also probably make a nicer looking version of the MSP430 one, perhaps with some additional notes on setting up and using interrupts that I've written on the back of my printed copy.  And I would really like to get my hands on an RP2350 dev board at some point, which uses a Cortex-M33 architecture (and Hazard3 RISC-V...).  Oh, and I have an ESP32 somewhere, but I'm not sure I _want_ to try to program that in assembly...  Anyhow, there _may_ be more to come in the future.

I may choose to create other kinds of quick reference cards for things other than assembly programming in the future.  In the past I've written up around a page of hand written notes for each of a few different microcontrollers that includes things like names and uses of special registers, important addresses for memmory mapped peripherals, information on how to setup interrupt vectors and write interrupts, and information on how to setup and use things like PWMs, timers, and certain other peripherals, in C or assembly.  I've also done this at least once for a certain LCD color display.  I don't know where all of these are, but I'll likely end up doing it again as I learn to use the microcontrollers I recently bought as well as some peripheral hardware I intend on buying sometime in the next month.  This stuff helps _me_ to get what I need out of the datasheets and distill it down to only the stuff that is important for my particular range of uses cases, and maybe it will also have some value to others.

## Licensing

The information in these cards is likely under copyright (as far as it technically can be; I did not literally copy/paste anything directly from copyrighted text, and copyright is more about expression than the specific knowledge being conveyed), and at the very least the original publishers of the information claim copyright.  These are provided purely for educational purposes, under fair-use doctrine.  As far as my own licensing on my contribution to this, _I_ don't care whether you redistribte these or not, and I don't expect any kind of attribution.  I made these for the primary purpose of educating myself and some of my children, and with the secondary purpose of making it easier for others to learn assembly programming.  As far as possible, and within the limits of whatever copyrighted information may be included, I surrender any ownership or implied copyright I might have and release my contribution to the public domain.  (This does mean that if ARM or whoever else has relevant copyright claim wants to take these and publish them as their own official documents (with my copyright notes replaced wit their own), they can 100% legally do that.  And _I would be perfectly fine with that happening!_  Again, my goal here is merely to fill in some gaps that have made it difficult to learn and write assembly for these devices.  If someone like ARM or WCH (the creator of the CH552 chip) took them and published them as their own, it would almost certainly meet this goal better than I can do on my own.  So please, go ahead and make these official, if you please!
